Constructing a predictive system for taxi service demands

The availability and low cost of accessing real time location infomation has brought up large amount of innovative investigations during the last decade. Taxi companies are among those who has already started exploring such information. The NYC taxi trip dataset used in this proposal is one example of the varies open available datasets accessable to the developers and researchers. The project proposed here aims at constructing a predictive, run-time evolving system for taxi service demands in a given region, initialized based on a model constructed in the NYC region by exploring the rich spatio and temporal infomation in the NYC trip data. The benifit of such a system is two-fold: (1) It improves the efficiency of taxi dispatching and time saving routing and, therefore, reduces the overall costs for taxi companies with reduced taxicab cruising time, and (2) will potentially improve the overall customer satisfication by making calling taxi a better experience, which in turn increases profits for taxi companies.

The NYC taxi dataset consists of over 30 Gb of trip data, showing over 100 millions of taxi trip records with information such as the medallion, hack license, vendor id, rate code, pickup/dropoff date and time in seconds, trip distance, pickup/dropoff location as latitude and longitude coordinates. There is also a complementary dataset showing the payment type, fair and tip amounts, tolls and much more. The data expands for about a year and covers the whole NYC region, which provides a amazing oppotunity for investigating the trip characteristics as well as constructing an initial model for the time evolving predictive system. Preliminary analysis show a surprisingly strong location dependece of the trip density/demands. High demands are observed around the Manhattan region, the LaGuardia Airport, and the JFK Airport, as well as the pathways connecting these three regions (Fig 1). A strong temporal dependence is also observed, along with a clear periodic pattern when averaged over the whole region. 

The infomation shown in this proposal is just the tip of the Iceburg. There is so many more to be explored and the possibilities are endless with this project. I'm so excited to work and to continue working on the project and I'm looking forward to receiving advices from and to discussing my ideas with the experts at the Data Incubator.
